YNU-354: Protocol Docs (#69)
layer-3/docs: docs/protocol/on-chain/security.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 4

> title: "Security Considerations"

Reviewer: I would either rename this to "Limitations and security" or add a separate "Current limitations" page explaining the following limitations of the current Custody SC implementation:
- channels for only 2 participants
- first participant must always be a client, while second - a Clearnode
- each participant can have only 1 allocation
- both allocations must be for the same token
- challenge duration is set to be no less then 1 hour
- it is not possible to challenge and already challenged channel
- it is not possible to resize directly from to to your EOA, you must deposit to or withdraw the funds from from Custody SC first.
- it is not possible to withdraw your funds from the Unified Balance on a chain with no open channel without opening a channel first. In future major release we plan to merge these steps in one operation.
- it is not possible to top-up a unified balance from or withdraw to your EOA balance in the same `resize(...)` operation. You must deposit your funds prior or withdraw after the `resize(...)` operation. In future major release we plan to merge these steps in one operation.

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

---

import Tooltip from '@site/src/components/Tooltip';

# Security Considerations

## Threat Model

### Assumptions

The protocol operates under the following security assumptions:

- **At least one honest party per <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip>** willing to enforce their rights
- **<Tooltip content="The underlying distributed ledger technology (e.g., Ethereum).">Blockchain</Tooltip> is secure and censorship-resistant** within reasonable bounds
- **Cryptographic primitives are secure** (ECDSA, keccak256)
- **<Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">Participants</Tooltip> have access to the blockchain** to submit challenges within the challenge period

:::info Trust Model
<Tooltip content="The on-chain smart contract protocol.">Nitrolite</Tooltip> is designed as a **trustless protocol** - no single party can steal funds or prevent others from recovering their legitimate share.
:::

### Protected Against

The protocol provides protection against:

> - **Replay attacks** via version numbers in adjudicator logic

Reviewer 2: It's checked inside Custody

Author: Changed

:::

## Security Properties

### Funds Safety

**Property**: <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">Participants</Tooltip> can always recover their funds according to the latest valid signed <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip>, even if other participants become unresponsive.

**Mechanism**: The challenge-response system ensures that:
1. Any party can initiate closure unilaterally
2. Challenge period allows time for others to respond with newer states
3. Newest valid state always wins
4. Funds are distributed according to the final accepted state

> ```mermaid
> graph TB
>     A[User has latest<br/>signed state] --> B{Broker responsive?}
>     B -->|Yes| C[Cooperative close<br/>Fast & cheap]
>     B -->|No| D[Challenge with<br/>latest state]
>     D --> E[Wait challenge<br/>period]
>     E --> F{Counter-challenge?}
>     F -->|No| G[Close & recover funds]
>     F -->|Yes, newer| H[Submit even<br/>newer state]
>     H --> E
>     
>     style C fill:#90EE90
>     style G fill:#90EE90
> ```

Reviewer: I would avoid using "Broker" term.

```suggestion
```mermaid
graph TB
    A[User has latest<br/>signed state] --> B{Other participant responsive?}
    B -->|Yes| C[Cooperative close<br/>Fast & cheap]
    B -->|No| D[Challenge with<br/>latest state]
    D --> E[Wait challenge<br/>period]
    E --> F{Communication continuation suggested?}
    F -->|No| G[Close & recover funds]
    F -->|Yes| H[Create and submit a<br/>newer state via `checkpoint(...)`]
    H --> E
    
    style C fill:#90EE90
    style G fill:#90EE90
```
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

### State Validity

**Property**: Only <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">states</Tooltip> signed by the required <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participants</Tooltip> (as determined by the <Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">adjudicator</Tooltip>) can be accepted.

**Mechanism**:
- Every state update requires cryptographic signatures
- Signatures are verified against the <Tooltip content="A cryptographic hash of a channel state, used for signature verification.">stateHash</Tooltip>
- Adjudicator validates state transitions according to application rules
- Invalid states are rejected on-chain

:::success Cryptographic Security

> State validity is enforced through ECDSA signatures on the secp256k1 curve, the same cryptographic foundation as Ethereum itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every state update requires cryptographic signatures
- Signatures are verified against the <Tooltip content="A specific representation of a State, used for signing and signature verification.">packedState</Tooltip>
- Adjudicator validates state transitions according to application rules
- Invalid states are rejected on-chain

:::success Cryptographic Security
State validity is enforced through [supported signatures](URL/TO/SUPPORTED/SIGNATURE/FORMATS/PAGE), all of which are supported by Ethereum itself.
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

:::

> 

Reviewer 3: Would be good to mention why using EIP-712 sigs is more superior than 191 in terms of security and user experience (as this is one of the minor but important features that differentiate our protocol)

Author: @dimast-x 
<img width="1007" height="1118" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4f90b517-c057-45a5-99c1-09df301b401c" />
I am adding this new section, is it fine?

Author: [2407a50f77b866e3cddc84621a441c69e6787515>](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/2407a50f77b866e3cddc84621a441c69e6787515)

Reviewer 3: Great work! Just one minor suggestion - no need to say this loudly with the green highlight about this being a differentiating feature XD Yes, it is differentiating, but its not the main feature that we need to highlight this much. Maybe try to shorten it - one small sentence should be enough

Author: Agreed 
[08805e53f419a6b6ac103bfb85a687bf6f6c5255](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/08805e53f419a6b6ac103bfb85a687bf6f6c5255)

:::

### Censorship Resistance

**Property**: Since anyone can submit challenges and responses, censorship of a single <Tooltip content="An entity (identified by a wallet address) that is part of a channel.">participant</Tooltip> does not prevent <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> closure.

**Mechanism**:
- Any participant can initiate challenge
- Any participant can respond to challenge
- Multiple participants can attempt the same operation
- As long as one honest party can transact, the channel can be resolved

## Attack Vectors and Mitigations

### Replay Attacks

**Attack**: Resubmitting old signed <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">states</Tooltip> to revert <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> to a previous favorable allocation.

**Mitigation**: 

> - <Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">Adjudicators</Tooltip> MUST implement version checking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">Adjudicators</Tooltip> MUST implement version checking to verify that a supplied "candidate" is indeed supported by a supplied "proof"
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

- Old states are automatically rejected

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[State v10 submitted] --> B{Compare versions}
    B -->|v10 > v5| C[Accept new state]
    B -->|v10 < v20| D[Reject old state]
    
    style C fill:#90EE90
    style D fill:#FFB6C1
```

:::tip Version Monotonicity
Always ensure state versions increase monotonically. Never sign two different states with the same version number.
:::

### State Withholding

**Attack**: Refusing to cooperate in closing <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip>, holding funds hostage.

**Mitigation**: 
- Challenge mechanism allows unilateral closure
- Challenge period ensures fair dispute resolution
- Latest signed <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip> always prevails

**Example Scenario**:
```
1. Alice and Bob have channel with $1000 each
2. After trading, valid state shows Alice: $1500, Bob: $500
3. Bob refuses to cooperate in cooperative close
4. Alice initiates challenge with latest signed state

> 5. Bob can respond only with older (less favorable) state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Bob has access only to an older state, meaning he is unable to resolve the challenge
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

> 6. After challenge period, Alice's state wins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. After challenge period elapses, Alice's state becomes the final one
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

7. Alice recovers her $1500
```

### Challenge Griefing

**Attack**: Repeatedly challenging with old states to delay closure and grief the counterparty.

**Mitigation**:
- Each valid newer state resets the challenge period
- Attacker must pay gas for each challenge attempt
- Eventually attacker runs out of old states
- Newest state always wins regardless of challenge count

> 

Reviewer: Additional mitigation point:
 
- the party being griefed can checkpoint with a latest valid state, impeding the griefer to challenge with any intermediate state

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

☐ Verify signatures are valid for expected participants
☐ Verify state version is sequential
☐ Verify allocations sum correctly
☐ Verify magic numbers (CHANOPEN/CHANCLOSE) if applicable
☐ Verify channelId matches expected value
☐ Test with small amounts first
```

### For Adjudicator Developers

**Critical Requirements**:

1. **Implement strict version comparison**: Ensure newer states always supersede older ones
2. **Validate state transitions**: Enforce application-specific rules correctly
3. **Optimize for gas efficiency**: Validation happens on-chain during disputes
4. **Consider edge cases**: Handle all possible state transition scenarios
5. **Audit thoroughly**: Security review before deployment is essential

:::warning Adjudicator Responsibility
<Tooltip content="A smart contract that validates state transitions according to application-specific rules.">Adjudicators</Tooltip> are critical to <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip> security. A flawed adjudicator can undermine the entire channel's safety guarantees.
:::

> **Adjudicator Development Checklist**:

Reviewer: I would remove this checklist as it encourages readers to develop their own Adjudicator contract. As we want the opposite, let's add a callout noting that:

Adjudicator is an incredibly important part of the Nitrolite protocol. Yellow Network is built on top of a specific adjudicator, which if changed, will render interoperability and security guarantees impossible. Before starting implementing your own Adjudicator, please be sure to advise the Nitrolite developer team, so that your work is not left out.

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

```markdown
☐ Version comparison logic is correct and strict
☐ All state transition rules are validated
☐ Gas usage is optimized
☐ Edge cases are handled (empty allocations, zero amounts, etc.)
☐ Fallback behavior is safe (reject on ambiguity)
☐ Code is audited by security professionals
☐ Test coverage includes adversarial scenarios
```

## Security Guarantees Summary

| Property | Guarantee | Mechanism |
|----------|-----------|-----------|
| **Funds Safety** | Cannot lose funds with valid signed state | Challenge-response + signatures |

> | **State Validity** | Only properly signed states accepted | ECDSA signature verification |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **State Validity** | Only properly signed states accepted | Signature verification |
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

| **Liveness** | Can always close if blockchain is live | Unilateral challenge mechanism |
| **Censorship Resistance** | Any party can enforce closure | Multiple submission paths |
| **No Replay** | Old states cannot be reused | Version number validation |

:::success Strong Security Model

> <Tooltip content="The on-chain smart contract protocol.">Nitrolite</Tooltip> provides **strong security guarantees** equivalent to Layer 1 <Tooltip content="The underlying distributed ledger technology (e.g., Ethereum).">blockchain</Tooltip> security, while enabling Layer 2 scalability and efficiency.

Reviewer: I would not specify that our security is equivalent, but rather "built on top of"

```suggestion
<Tooltip content="The on-chain smart contract protocol.">Nitrolite</Tooltip> provides **strong security guarantees** built on top of Layer 1 <Tooltip content="The underlying distributed ledger technology (e.g., Ethereum).">blockchain</Tooltip> security, while enabling Layer 2 scalability and efficiency.
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

:::

## Emergency Procedures

### If <Tooltip content="A virtual ledger layer that provides a unified ledger (through Nitro RPC) and coordinates state channels (through Nitrolite), providing chain abstraction for developers and users.">a Clearnode</Tooltip> Becomes Unresponsive

1. **Retrieve latest signed <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip>** from local storage
2. **Initiate challenge** on-chain with latest state
3. **Monitor for counter-challenges** during challenge period
4. **Submit newer states** if counterparty challenges with older version
5. **Close <Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip>** after challenge period expires

> 6. **Funds are recovered** according to latest valid state

Reviewer: Some steps are not necessary as a challenge can not be counter-challenged.

```suggestion
1. **Retrieve latest signed <Tooltip content="A snapshot of the channel at a point in time, including fund allocations and application-specific data.">state</Tooltip>** from local storage
2. **Initiate challenge** on-chain with latest state
3. **Close the<Tooltip content="A secure communication pathway between participants that locks funds in an on-chain smart contract while enabling off-chain state updates.">channel</Tooltip>** after challenge period expires
4. **Funds are recovered** according to latest valid state
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)

### If Challenge Period May Expire

1. **Ensure <Tooltip content="The underlying distributed ledger technology (e.g., Ethereum).">blockchain</Tooltip> access** - check network connectivity
2. **Prepare transactions in advance** - have signed transactions ready
3. **Monitor mempool** - watch for conflicting transactions
4. **Use appropriate gas prices** - ensure timely confirmation

> 5. **Have backup RPC endpoints** - don't rely on single provider

Reviewer: Currently it is unclear which situation is in question here.

```suggestion
### If you have been challenged

1. **Check for the latest state** - make sure the channel was challenged with the latest state. If not, you should checkpoint it with one to avoid funds loss.
2. **Ensure <Tooltip content="The underlying distributed ledger technology (e.g., Ethereum).">blockchain</Tooltip> access** - check network connectivity
3. **Use appropriate gas prices** - ensure timely confirmation
4. **Have backup RPC endpoints** - don't rely on single provider
```

Author: [fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6](https://github.com/layer-3/docs/pull/69/commits/fc05ed64438a9627748ad466261795d9e49e55c6)
